 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Abscesses and Deep-Seated Wound Infections 
 
Abscesses are accumulations of pus in the tissues and any organism isolated from them may be of 
significance. They occur in many parts of the body as superficial infections or as deep-seated infections 
associated with any internal organ. 
 
General information  
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Use aseptic technique. Collect specimens in appropriate CE 
marked leak proof containers and transport specimens in sealed plastic bags. 
 
Avoid accidental injury when pus is aspirated. 
 
Collection: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where possible. 
 
Samples of pus are preferred to swabs. However, pus swabs are often received (when using swabs, the 
deepest part of the wound should be sampled, avoiding the superficial microflora). 
 
Unless otherwise stated, swabs for bacterial and fungal culture should be taken with liquid eSwabs. 
 
Pus 
eSwab for Oxford Road Campus 
 
 
 
 
Collect specimens other than swabs into appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and place in sealed 
plastic bags. 
 
Specimen type: Abscess pus, abscess swab, deep-seated pus swab, post-operative wound swab, wound 
exudates. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible. 
 
The volume of specimen influences the transport time that is acceptable. Large volumes of purulent material 
maintain the viability of anaerobes for longer. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: Minimum volume of 1mL of pus. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Swabs should be well soaked in pus. The liquid in the eSwab should NOT be discarded. The laboratory cannot 
process samples with <1ml of liquid remaining in the swab and these samples will be discarded. 
 
Special precautions: 
If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. Delays of over 48hr 
are undesirable. 
 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 1 day  
Turnaround time to final result (working days): Direct culture 5-7 days 
 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: The recovery of anaerobes is compromised if the transport 
time exceeds 3hr 
 
 
(Last updated November 2023) 
