 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Anti-Neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) 
 
General information 
 
Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) are found in several types of vasculitis. Samples for ANCA are 
initially tested by immunofluorescence on neutrophils. Positive samples are then further tested by multiplex 
flow immunoassay for specific antibodies against either proteinase 3 (PR3) or myeloperoxidase (MPO). In 
general, a classical c-ANCA pattern corresponds to PR3 reactivity whilst a perinuclear p-ANCA pattern 
corresponds to MPO reactivity. Atypical ANCA patterns do not usually correspond to either antigen. 
These tests are used to diagnose vasculitis and to monitor disease activity. Infections and autoimmunity can 
produce false positive tests reducing the specificity of ANCA testing. 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature 
 
Repeat frequency: No more frequently than every four weeks, except when plasmapheresis is being done. 
 
Special precautions: None 
 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Normal reference ranges: Neg 
 
Volume and sample type: 4ml serum  
 
Method: Immunofluorescence 
 
Participation in EQA Scheme: UK NEQAS for Autoimmune Serology ANCA and GBM 
 
Turnaround time (calendar days from sample receipt to authorised result): Median - 3 
We will undertake urgent same day testing during laboratory opening hours provided that the laboratory is 
contacted by phone and the sample arrives before noon. 
 
 
Clinical information 
 
Indications for the test: ANCA testing is helpful in patients with vasculitis affecting the kidneys 
 
Factors affecting the test: Positive ANA, i.e. the presence of other autoantibodies. False positives seen in 
infections. 
 
Guidelines are provided in the following reference: Addendum to the International Consensus 
Statement on Testing and reporting of ANCA Am J Clin Pathol 2003; 120; 312-318 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
 
(Last updated July 2023) 
