 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Aspergillus fumigatus precipitins 
 
General information 
 
Precipitin testing: These tests detect the presence of IgG antibodies to Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus 
precipitins - see also: Farmer's lung and Avian Precipitins 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature 
 
Repeat frequency: On appearance of new symptoms 
 
Special precautions: None 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Normal reference range: 0-40 mg/L 
 
Volume and sample type: 4ml serum 
 
Method: FEIA (Fluoroenzyme immunoassay) 
 
Turnaround time (calendar days from sample receipt to authorised result): Median – 4 
 
Participation in EQA Scheme: UK NEQAS for FUNGAL and RELATED ANTIGENS 
 
Clinical information 
 
Indications for the test: Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis - IgG antibodies are a useful aid to diagnosis 
in the following settings: 
 
• 
Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; usually presents as deteriorating or brittle asthma. IgE antibodies 
should also be checked. 
• 
Aspergilloma; these may form in cavities or bronchiectatic lung. For example, this test is used to 
check for aspergilloma in patients with cystic fibrosis. 
• 
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis 24 hours after inhalation of spores. 
 
Factors affecting the test: Aspergillus antibodies are not a recommended test for the investigation of the 
majority of cases of invasive aspergillosis in immunocompromised hosts. 
 
Interpreting results: 
IgG antibodies are infrequent in healthy individuals. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
In hypersensitivity pneumonitis, IgG antibodies are usually present alone. IgG antibodies, without IgE 
antibodies can also be seen in some cases of sub acute invasive aspergillus. 
 
In bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and aspergilloma a mixture of IgE and IgG antibodies are usually present. 
Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis can be caused by species other than A. fumigatus: if there is a high index of 
suspicion, we can send a sample to the reference laboratory to look for antibodies to other Aspergillus 
species. In allergic rhinitis and asthma, where aspergillus is a relevant allergen, IgE antibodies dominate. 
 
 
(Last updated July 2023) 
