 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/4 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/4 
Aspergillus galactomannan 
 
Platelia assay for Aspergillus galactomannan circulating antigen in serum and other body fluids: this test is 
indicated for presumptive diagnosis of Aspergillus infection. 
 
General information 
 
Turnaround time: This assay is performed every day, Monday-Friday. Turnaround time: 95% within one 
weekday. 
 
Sample type/container:  
 
Blood:  
 
• 
 4.9 ml clotted blood 
• 
Serum tube (Sarstedt S-Monovette white cap) or serum gel tube (brown cap). Blood collected in EDTA 
tubes will be rejected.   
• 
Please do not remove the cap before sending for testing nor share the sample to avoid laboratory 
contamination. 
 
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF): 
 
 
• 
Send minimum of 2 ml collected into appropriate UKCA/CE-marked sterile leakproof containers.  
• 
Do not send containers with trap tubing still attached. These samples are prone to leaking and 
contamination. The trap tubing must be replaced with a secure screw cap lid prior to placing in the 
specimen bag. 
 
Other sample types: 
• 
The test is only validated for blood/serum and BALF 
• 
The test can be performed on other body fluids such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) but clear evidence-
based guidance for interpretation of the results cannot be provided. 
 
 
Transportation 
• 
Samples should be placed into a plastic Ziploc bag, sealed, and then placed into another sealed plastic 
Ziploc bag (preferably with a biohazard label on the outside), as shown below.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/4 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/4 
 
• 
Category B transport boxes or an appropriate transport bag (i.e., one which adheres to regulations 
governing the transportation of diagnostic specimens) must be used for transport by road or between 
Manchester University Foundation Trust sites (but are not necessary within Wythenshawe hospital 
grounds). 
• 
Please see below for packaging requirements.
 
For more information - https://mrcm.org.uk/sample-collection/ 
 
Laboratory Information 
 
Biological interval/clinical decision values: 
 
The Platelia galactomannan (GM) test results are expressed as an index value and are reported for blood as 
negative or positive, and for BAL negative, weak positive, or positive – with the index value provided. 
 
Interpretation of values depends on the sample type: 
 
Blood/serum: GM index values of > 0.5 are interpreted as positive. 
 
The accuracy of the result may be affected if the blood sample is more than 5 days old or if the serum sample 
is more than 2 days old. 
 
BALF: GM index values >1.0 are interpreted as positive. Index values 0.5-1.0 have a lower predictive value than 
values >1.0 and are interpreted as weakly positive. Further sampling is recommended. 
 
The accuracy of the result may be affected if the BALF sample is more than 1 day old. 
 
A single negative result does not rule out the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis (IA). Repeat testing and 
additional alternative modalities of testing are recommended if the result is negative, but the disease is 
suspected. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/4 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/4 
 
Conversely, a single positive GM value does not solely constitute the diagnosis of IA and additional diagnostic 
tests and/or testing of additional samples is needed. Recent data suggests that the combination of two 
weak/positive GM test results, one in serum/plasma (≥ 0.7) and one in BALF (≥ 0.8), may suggest the presence 
of IA. 
 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF): The test is not validated for CSF samples. The cut-off value for this sample type has 
not been established but values >0.5 and ≥1 have been used. Measuring the serum GM/CSF GM ratio may be 
useful as high galactomannan levels in CSF are indicative of intrathecal infection.  
 
Sputum: The test is not validated for sputum samples. The cut-off value for this sample type has not been 
established. High values (>1) should only trigger further investigations in the presence of clinical suspicion. 
 
Clinical Information 
 
No specific time of optimal collection. First clinical indication or monitoring of invasive aspergillosis. 
 
In general, the performance of the GM test varies between patient groups and sample types. Blood 
galactomannan has high specificity in neutropenic haematology-oncology patients and solid organ transplant 
patients, whilst it has very low sensitivity in non-neutropenic patients. High sensitivity and specificity can be 
achieved by testing samples collected from the likely site on infection (mainly lungs, BALF). BALF is the 
preferred sample type in non-neutropenic patients. 
 
This test should be used in conjunction with other diagnostic procedures such as high-volume fungal culture, 
Aspergillus PCR, histological examination of biopsy specimens and radiographic evidence, as an aid in the 
diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis, in specific clinical contexts (e.g., neutropenic patients or patients treated 
with immunosuppressants).  
 
This test can also be used as an aid to monitor antifungal treatment efficacy based on galactomannan index 
evolution. 
 
In appropriate clinical settings, screening may be considered to monitor for evidence of elevated levels of 
galactomannan, which provides a potential surrogate marker for invasive Aspergillus disease (depending on 
sample type tested). 
 
For clinical advice and guidance, please contact the laboratory via Hive or by email (mrcm@mft.nhs.uk). 
 
Limitations: 
 
Possible causes of false negatives: 
The Platelia Aspergillus galactomannan assay may exhibit reduced detection of galactomannan in patients with 
chronic granulomatous disease and hyper IgE (Job’s) syndrome. 
 
The concomitant use of mould-active anti-fungal prophylaxis or therapy may result in reduced sensitivity with 
the galactomannan test. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   4/4 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
4/4 
 
Blood galactomannan has very low sensitivity in non-neutropenic patients. BAL is the preferred sample type 
in these patients when pulmonary aspergillosis is suspected. 
 
Possible causes of false positives: 
Serum specimens stored inappropriately or tested with a delay may give false positive results due to 
contamination with fungi and/or bacteria.  
 
The performance of the Platelia Aspergillus galactomannan assay has not been evaluated in neonatal samples. 
There is a higher incidence in the number of false positive galactomannan results reported in European 
literature in samples from the neonatal population.  
 
Other genera of fungi such as Penicillium, Fusarium, Alternaria, Paecilomyces, Geotrichum and Histoplasma 
have shown reactivity with the monoclonal antibody used in the assay for the detection of Aspergillus GM. 
Histoplasmosis should be considered in patients with travel history to endemic areas. 
 
Positive reactions in the absence of clinical signs may be observed in patients receiving products containing 
galactomannan, either parenterally or orally (if there is an alteration of the intestinal barrier), due to 
production processes that include fungal microorganism-based fermentation.  
 
For example, galactofuranose, which can be present in various foods, particularly cereals, cereal products, cow 
milk formula and cream desserts, may produce a positive result in patients with a damaged or immature 
intestinal barrier. Dietary factors must therefore be considered as a potential source of antigenemia in these 
patients particularly in the absence of clinical signs and symptoms of invasive aspergillosis.  
 
Historically, positive test results were reported in patients receiving ß-lactams such as piperacillin/tazobactam, 
amoxicillin with clavulanic acid, and ampicillin but this has been addressed now in the manufacturing processes 
of these and other antibiotics. Therefore, these antibiotics are currently not a significant source for false-
positive test results. 
 
The Platelia Aspergillus galactomannan test may exhibit false positive results with serum specimens when 
digestive enzymes of fungal origin, like Nortase, are used for enzyme substitution therapy in exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency in ICU patients. 
 
 
References: 
BioRad Platelia Aspergillus Ag, SEMI-QUANTITATIVE IMMUNOENZYMATIC SANDWICH MICROPLATE ASSAY FOR THE DETECTION OF ASPERGILLUS 
GALACTOMANNAN ANTIGEN IN ADULT AND PEDIATRIC SERUM SPECIMENS AND BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE (BAL) FLUID SPECIMENS, version 
0001315 - 2023/07. 
 
Toine Mercier et al., Defining Galactomannan Positivity in the Updated EORTC/MSGERC Consensus Definitions of Invasive Fungal Diseases, Clinical 
Infectious Diseases, Volume 72, Issue Supplement_2, 15 March 2021, Pages S89–S94, https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1786. 
 
(Last updated November 2024) 
