 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
Aspergillus quantitative PCR on respiratory samples 
 
ELITech Aspergillus PCR: this test is indicated to support a diagnosis of Aspergillus-related lung disease. 
 
General information 
 
Turnaround time: This assay is performed twice weekly, on Tuesday and Friday morning. Turnaround time: 
95% within 7 days of sample receipt. 
 
Sample type/container:  
 
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples: 
 
• 
Send minimum of 1-2 mL collected into appropriate UKCA/CE-marked sterile leakproof container.  
• 
Do not send containers with trap tubing still attached. These samples are prone to leaking and 
contamination. The trap tubing must be replaced with a secure screw cap lid prior to placing in the 
specimen bag. 
 
Other sample types: 
• 
The test is only validated for BALF. 
• 
The test can be performed on other body fluids such as sputum, pleural fluid, and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) but clear evidence-based guidance for interpretation of the results cannot be provided. 
 
Transportation 
 
• 
Samples should be placed into a plastic Ziploc bag, sealed, and then placed into another sealed 
plastic Ziploc bag (preferably with a biohazard label on the outside), as shown below.  
  
Category B transport boxes or an appropriate transport bag (i.e., one which adheres to regulations governing 
the transportation of diagnostic specimens) must be used for transport by road or between Manchester 
University Foundation Trust sites (but are not necessary within Wythenshawe hospital grounds). Please see 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
below for packaging requirements.
 
For more information - https://mrcm.org.uk/sample-collection/ 
 
Laboratory Information 
 
Biological interval/clinical decision values: 
 
The ELITech Aspergillus PCR results are expressed as copies/mL of Aspergillus spp. 18S rDNA; Cq values are 
also provided. 
 
Values of <120 copies/mL are interpreted as negative results. 
 
Values >210 copies/mL are interpreted as positive results. 
 
Values from 120 to 210 copies/mL are interpreted as indeterminate results and may reflect colonisation but 
do not exclude infection with Aspergillus. Testing of additional samples and/or use of additional diagnostic 
tests (Aspergillus galactomannan and high-volume fungal culture) is recommended to clarify the diagnosis. 
 
A single negative result does not rule out the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis (IA). Repeat testing and 
additional alternative modalities of testing are recommended if the result is negative, but disease is 
suspected. 
 
Conversely, a single positive Aspergillus PCR does not solely constitute the diagnosis of IA and testing of 
additional samples and/or use of additional diagnostic tests is needed. Recent data requires the need for 2 
consecutive positive results in BAL as positive mycological criterion for IA. According to EORTC/MSGERC 
criteria, the combination of a positive Aspergillus PCR with two weak positive or a single positive GM test 
result (e.g., one in serum/plasma (≥ 0.7) or one in BALF (≥ 0.8)), may suggest the presence of IA. 
 
Clinical Information 
 
No specific time of optimal collection. First clinical indication of pulmonary or invasive aspergillosis. 
 
This assay detects the 18S rDNA of Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus terreus, Aspergillus niger and possibly 
other species of Aspergillus. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
 
Assay for the quantitative detection of Aspergillus species genomic DNA extracted from respiratory 
specimens from the lower respiratory tract, as an aid to the diagnosis of invasive and non-invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. The results need to be interpreted in the context of the clinical condition of the 
patient and other diagnostic test results. 
 
This test should be used in conjunction with other diagnostic procedures and biomarkers to increase the 
likelihood of diagnosing aspergillosis.  
 
Limitations: 
 
Possible causes of false negatives: 
False negative results may occur for a variety of reasons, for example inappropriate quality or volume of 
sample and antifungal prophylaxis interference with assay.  
 
Possible causes of false positives: 
False positive results may occur if genera closely related to Aspergillus spp., e.g. Penicillium spp., are also 
present in the sample and detected due to the sequence similarity in the 18S rDNA. 
 
 
 
References: 
ELITech Aspergillus spp. ELITe MGB Kit product insert, SCH mRTS110PLD, 28/07/2023, Review 10 
 
Donnelly JP, Chen SC, Kauffman CA, et al., Revision and Update of the Consensus Definitions of Invasive Fungal Disease From the European 
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer and the Mycoses Study Group Education and Research Consortium, Clinical Infectious Diseases, 
Volume 71, Issue 6, 15 September 2020, Pages 1367–1376, https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciz1008. 
 
White PL, Bretagne S, Caliendo AM, et al., Aspergillus Polymerase Chain Reaction—An Update on Technical Recommendations, Clinical Applications, 
and Justification for Inclusion in the Second Revision of the EORTC/MSGERC Definitions of Invasive Fungal Disease, Clinical Infectious Diseases, 
Volume 72, Issue Supplement_2, 15 March 2021, Pages S95–S101, https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1865. 
 
Ullmann AJ, Aguado JM, Arikan-Akdagli S, et al., Diagnosis and management of Aspergillus diseases: executive summary of the 2017 ESCMID-ECMM-
ERS guideline. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2018 May;24 Suppl 1:e1-e38. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2018.01.002. 
 
(Last updated November 2025) 
