 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Autoimmune diabetes marker panel 
 
General information 
 
The assessment of autoantibodies to pancreatic β cell antigens is an important serological marker of type 1 
diabetes mellitus (Type 1 DM). The antigens recognised by these antibodies include insulinoma associated 
antigen 2 (IA-2), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) GAD65kDa isoform, zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) and insulin. 
The Autoimmune diabetes panel contains IA-2 antibodies, ZnT8 antibodies and GAD antibodies. 
 
Assay interferences: Please see the user guide for individual analytes  
 
Laboratory information 
 
Analyte: Insulinoma associated antigen 2 (IA-2) antibodies, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) GAD65kDa 
isoform antibodies, zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) antibodies 
 
Units: Please see the user guide for individual analytes 
 
Specimen type: Serum (Brown top serum gel bottle) 
 
Frequency of analysis: At initial diagnosis and in patients with suspected type 1 diabetes. Highest accuracy 
seen at initial presentation. 
 
Turnaround times: 10 days 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature 
 
Additional/special requirements: None 
 
Method: ELISA 
 
Participation in EQA Scheme: UK NEQAS for Diabetic Markers 
 
Clinical information 
 
Interpretation: Autoimmune diabetes associated autoantibodies (ADAA) can be seen before clinical symptoms 
and used to stratify risk of progression to overt diabetes. In patients without a current diabetes diagnosis the 
likelihood of progression to diabetes within 5 years increases as additional antibody positivity increases. The 
5-year risk of progression with only Islet cell antibody positivity is 2.2% but this increases up to 70% when 3 
additional antibodies (including ZnT8, IA-2 and GAD65) are also present (Polly, 2010). ADAA positivity can be 
lost as islet cell destruction progresses leading to misleading negative results. NG17 states the false negative 
rate can be reduced by carrying out quantitative tests for 2 different diabetes specific autoantibodies (with at 
least 1 being positive). Serum C-peptide should be used if there is still diagnostic uncertainty after the use of 
autoantibody testing.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Reference range: Please see the user guide for individual analytes 
Polly J. Bingley (2010) Clinical Applications of Diabetes Antibody Testing, The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology 
& Metabolism, 95, 25–33 
(Last updated July 2023) 
