 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Molecular Microbiology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoea, Trichomonas 
vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium NAATs 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives):  
 
cobas® PCR media tube  
cobas® PCR Dual Swab Collection Kit 
 
Specimen type:  
 
For Chlamydia/ Gonococcal PCR the following samples are accepted: urine, swabs such as vaginal/vulval, 
cervical, throat, rectal, eye, penile, urethral, genital. 
Trichomonas Vaginalis and Mycoplasma Genitalium PCR the following samples are accepted: urine, 
vaginal/vulval or cervical swabs. From male patients, urine only. 
 
Collection: Specimens should be collected and handled following the recommended guidelines on the 
collection packs: 
 
Male and female urine specimens 
 
Male and female urines must be collected in a sterile container and transferred to the cobas® PCR media 
tube within 24 hours of collection. After transfer, specimens can then be stored at 2-30⁰C for up to 3 months 
prior to testing.  
 
Urine specimens must fill the cobas® PCR media tube between the 2 black urine fill lines (shown below). If 
the amount of urine is above or below these lines the specimen will not be tested by the laboratory. 
 
 
Urine specimen with 2 black urine fill lines 
 
Vaginal, throat and anorectal specimens 
 
 
Woven polyester swab used to collect vaginal, throat and anorectal specimens 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Molecular Microbiology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
Only the larger woven polyester swab (shown above) included in the cobas® PCR Dual Swab Collection Kit 
should be used to collect vaginal, rectal and throat specimens. Specimens may be stored in cobas® PCR 
media at 2-30°C for up to 3 months. 
 
 
 
Endocervical specimens 
 
The larger woven polyester swab (shown above) included in the cobas® PCR Dual Swab Collection Kit should 
be used first to remove any cervical secretions followed by the smaller flocked swab (shown below) to collect 
the endocervical specimen. 
 
 
Flocked swab used to collect endocervical specimens 
 
Please ensure the correct swab is used for the test requested or the sample cannot be processed. Please 
note only ONE swab should be returned in the specimen tube. 
 
Specimens may be stored in cobas® PCR media at 2-30°C for up to 3 months.  
 
Specimen transport: Transport at ambient temperature via porter, courier, Royal Mail or DX compliant with 
IATA packing instruction 650 
 
Type and volume of sample: 2mL Urine 
 
Special precautions: Patient consent must be obtained for both Chlamdyia and Gonococcal testing.  Single 
tests cannot be accepted for either Chlamydia or Gonorrhoea. If consent for both cannot be obtained, please 
contact the laboratory for information on alternative laboratories that provide a single analyte service. 
 
Specimens received more than 3 months after collection will not be tested by the laboratory. 
 
Only the woven polyester swab or flocked swabs contained in the cobas® PCR Dual Swab Collection Kit will 
be accepted for testing. 
 
Swab specimens received with no swab or 2 swabs will not be tested by the laboratory.  
 
Cobas® PCR media that has expired will not be tested. 
 
Please ensure the request form clearly states the specimen type and the required test. 
 
Please ensure the swabs are not inverted in the tube, i.e. the specimen collection end should be placed in 
the liquid media. 
 
Laboratory information 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Molecular Microbiology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
 
Measurement units: Relative Light Units (RLU) 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 3 days  
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 4 days 
 
For urgent tests please contact the laboratory 
 
M. genitalium antibiotic resistance testing is a referral test with a significantly longer turnaround time, 
please refer to the UKHSA BRD user manual. 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Samples must be kept at ambient temperature.  
 
Where possible, check that swabs are visually clear of stool, mucus or blood as these can interfere with the 
assay. Other known factors include, some over the counter feminine hygiene, lubricants or prescriptions. 
Where possible, request patient avoids applying these 24 hours prior to sample collection.  
 
False negative results may occur for a variety of reasons, for example inappropriate timing of sample 
collection, inappropriate sample, presence of target below the detectable limit of the assay. New and 
emerging variants may also occur which may not be detected by this assay. Towards the limit of detection of 
an assay sampling variation will result in lower reproducibility.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Last updated November 2025) 
  
