 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Clostridium difficile GDH EIA, and Toxin EIA and Toxin PCR 
 
C. difficile is a Gram positive, spore forming, strictly anaerobic rod, so named because of the difficulty in 
original culture and characterisation. Toxigenic strains produce large protein toxins A and B, both being 
major virulence factors. Most diseases associated with C. difficile are intestinal though C. difficile may be 
isolated from blood or tissues. The laboratory uses the three-step testing algorthim recommended by the 
Department of Health and Social Care. This involves the specimen being tested using C.difficile GDH EIA, 
C.difficile Toxin EIA and C.difficile toxin PCR assays.  
 
General information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof 
containers and transport specimens in sealed plastic bags.  
 
 
 
Specimen type: Faeces 
 
Collection: Specimen may be passed into a clean, dry, disposable bedpan or similar container and 
transferred into a CE marked leak proof container. The specimen is unsatisfactory if any residual soap, 
detergent or disinfectant remains in the pan. 
 
Specimen transport: Compliance with current postal and transportation regulations is essential. 
 
Clinical samples should be collected into a sterile leak-proof container in a sealed plastic bag. Specimens 
should be transported and processed as soon as possible. If processing is delayed refrigeration is preferable 
to storage at room temperature. 
 
Type and volume of sample: A liquid specimen of 2 mL is sufficient for culture and toxin detection. 
 
2 gram (large pea-size) of unformed specimen  
 
Special precautions: Formed/semi-formed stools are unsuitable for investigation for C. difficile. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 1 day 
 
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 1 day. Please note that a 1-day TAT for high-risk samples 
cannot be achieved as the sample requires a clearance of CL3 pathogens before C.difficile toxin testing on 
DS2 analyser can be performed. 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: The detection of C. difficile is dependent on the number of 
organisms present in the sample, reliable results are dependent on correct specimen collection, handling, 
and storage. 
 
Limitations: Interpretation of toxin results in children less than 16 years old should be treated with caution. 
 
 
 
(Last updated November 2025)  
