 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Molecular Microbiology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
CMV (Cytomegalovirus) antiviral resistance markers 
 
CMV viral load positive bloods. Complete CMV antiviral resistance genotypic screening including 
 
UL97: Nucleotide sequencing of the CMV phosphotransferase gene for the identification of mutations 
encoding resistance to ganciclovir and maribavir. 
 
UL54: Nucleotide sequencing of the DNA polymerase gene for the identification of mutations encoding 
resistance to ganciclovir, foscarnet and cidofovir. 
 
 
General information  
 
Collection container (including preservatives): 
CE marked leak proof container 
EDTA blood tube 
 
Specimen type: EDTA blood                                                                  
 
Specimen transport: Ambient or refrigerated 
 
For PCR for confirmation of active CMV infection and monitoring of antiviral therapy please send 4mL of 
EDTA blood.  This should be stored at 4°C and dispatched as soon as possible after being drawn.   
 
If longer storage is unavoidable, serum or plasma may be stored frozen, but should not be repeatedly frozen 
and thawed. In special circumstances, 0.5mL of serum or plasma can be tested, but for such small volumes 
avoid using a large container but use a small capacity container with a screw‐cap, such as an Eppendorff 
tube. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 3.0 mL 
 
Special precautions: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. 
Delays of over 48hr are undesirable.    
 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: mL Wild type / resistant mutation 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 5 days  
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 7 days 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Molecular Microbiology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: 
 
False negative results may occur for a variety of reasons, for example inappropriate timing of sample 
collection, inappropriate sample, presence of virus below the detectable limit of the assay. 
 
New and emerging variants may also occur which may not be detected by this assay. Towards the limit of 
detection of an assay sampling variation will result in lower reproducibility. 
                     
(Last updated November 2023) 
     
