 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
CSF (Bacteriology) 
 
Meningitis is defined as inflammation of the meninges. This process may be acute or chronic and infective or 
non-infective. Many infective agents have been shown to cause meningitis, including viruses, bacteria, fungi 
and parasites. 
 
Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital is a specialist paediatric neurology centre; as such CSF obtained from 
ventricular shunts and shunts removed during revision may also be submitted to the laboratory for 
microscopy and culture. 
 
General information 
 
Collection container: Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and transport 
specimens in sealed plastic bags. 
 
Specimen type: Cerebrospinal Fluid 
 
 
 
Collection: Use aseptic technique. Collect specimens into appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and 
place in sealed plastic bag. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible. CSFs should not 
be podded. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: For routine cell count & culture; ideally a minimum volume of 1 mL  
For Mycobacteria sp., culture (Tb), at least 6mL where possible; such investigations cannot be performed 
outside of normal hours CSF is normally collected sequentially into three or more separate containers which 
should be numbered consecutively. 
 
Special precautions: Always contact the laboratory when sending a CSF sample. Send sample 3 (or the last 
sample if more than 3 taken) to Microbiology. Outside of normal hours contact the on-call Biomedical 
Scientist through the main switchboard. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Cell count x106/L 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Biological reference units: 
 
Leucocytes (WBC) 
 
Neonates 0 - 30 cells x 106/L  
1-4yr old 0 - 20 cells x 106/L  
5yr-puberty 0 - 10 cells x 106/L  
Adults 0 - 5 cells x 106/L 
 
When possible the WBC count will be differentiated into lymphocytes and polymorphs. 
 
Erythrocytes(RBC) 
 
Newborn 0 - 675 cells x 106/L  
Adults 0 - 10 cells x106 /L 
 
Protein (Performed by Biochemistry) 
 
Neonates ≤6d 0.7 g/L  
Others 0.2-0.4g/L (<1% of serum protein concentration) 
 
Glucose (Performed by Biochemistry) 
≥60% of simultaneously determined plasma concentration (CSF: serum ratio ≥0.6) 
 
Turnaround time: 30 mins to 1 hour for microscopy 
2-3 working days for culture 
 
Clinical information 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Cells disintegrate and a delay may produce a cell count that 
does not reflect the clinical situation of the patient. 
 
The laboratory will be unable to perform cell counts on clotted samples. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Last updated December 2020) 
 
 
