 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Cystic fibrosis 
 
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by a defect in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator gene that affects 
the transport of ions and water across the epithelium. This leads to progressive pulmonary disease 
associated with pulmonary infections, which are the major cause of morbidity and mortality in CF patients. 
The major pathogens are S. aureus, H. influenza (usually non-encapsulated in CF patients), S. pneumoniae, 
Burkholderia and Pseudomonads, particularly mucoid P. aeruginosa strains. Strains of P. aeruginosa with 
differing antibiotic susceptibilities may be isolated from a single sample. 
 
General information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof 
containers and transport specimens in sealed plastic bags. 
 
 
 
Sputum/Pleural Fluids/BALs                    
 Cough Swabs (Paediatric CF) 
   
 
Specimen type: Respiratory specimens; Sputum and Cough Swabs (Paediatric use only) 
 
Collection: Use aseptic technique. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible. Paediatric postal 
samples should be submitted using the kit provided by the Microbiology Laboratory. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 5mL 
 
Special precautions: Some complex identification can take several weeks to confirm identity. 
 
If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature.  Delays of over 48hr 
are undesirable. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time: Negative results available at 2 working days and positives generally within 8 working days. 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as 
possible.  The recovery rate of Haemophilus sp., is reduced the longer the time taken to transport the 
specimen.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Last updated December 2014) 
