 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Double Negative T Cell (DNT) panel 
 
General information 
 
Assay principles: This test is usually done in conjunction with lymphocyte subsets surface markers (ID), in 
which case a separate sample is not required. This assay is used in the investigation of Autoimmune 
Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS) also known as Canale-Smith syndrome. 
 
Patients with ALPS have an increase in a normally rare population of T cells that are alpha beta T-cell 
receptor (TCR) positive, and negative for both CD4 and CD8 (double negative T cells - DNTs). 
An ALPS-like phenotype could be identified in other immunological and haematological conditions and if this 
result is unexpected, please discuss with adult or paediatric immunology.  
 
Assay interferences: Older samples may exhibit loss of surface antigens and therefore the sample should be 
as fresh as possible. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Analyte: Double Negative T Cell (DNT) Panel 
 
Units: % 
 
Specimen type: Peripheral blood - EDTA  
 
Method: Flow Cytometry 
 
Frequency of analysis: Dependent on clinical indication 
 
Turnaround times: 1-2 routine working days, Assay run daily Monday to Friday 09:00-15:00 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature 
 
Additional/special requirements: Note that samples should be received in the laboratory no later than 3pm 
on a Friday. Samples should be kept at room temperature. 
 
Participation in EQA Scheme: N/A 
 
Clinical information 
 
Interpretation: Use of this panel in the investigation of immunodeficiency should be discussed with the 
appropriate Consultant Immunologist (adult or paediatric).  
 
References:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
• 
Revised diagnostic criteria and classification for the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome 
(ALPS): report from the 2009 NIH International Workshop. Joao B Oliveira et al. Blood, 2010 Oct 
7;116(14):e35-40. 
(Last updated February 2024) 
