 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Faeces Bacteria/Parasite PCR - Serosep DX 
 
All diagnostic faecal samples, except single organism screens, are tested for the following organisms: 
Campylobacter jejuni/coli/lari., Salmonella enterica sp., Shiga-toxin producing E.coli (STEC) including 0157, 
Enteroinvasive E. coli/Shigella sp, Vibrio cholerae/parahaemolyticus, Yersinia enterocolitica, Cryptosporidium 
parvum/hominis, Giardia and Entamoeba histolytica. 
Faecal samples submitted from patients with suspected food poisoning, or foreign travel history to 
Asia/Africa/South America, will have additional Salmonella enrichment culture performed. 
Food poisoning samples will also have additional culture performed for Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus 
cereus., Clostridium perfringens, atypical Vibrio sp. and Listeria monocytogenes. 
 
General information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof 
containers 
 
 
 
         
Specimen type: Faeces 
 
Collection: Specimen may be passed into a clean, dry, disposable bedpan or similar container and 
transferred into an appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and place in sealed plastic bags. 
 
Please do not send additional faeces to the laboratory collected within the same 24-hour period as the last 
sample sent. Additional faeces received that was collected within the same 24 hour period will not be 
processed.  
 
Request form: The microbiological examination of faeces is complex and requires a full clinical history 
including the possibility of food poisoning, foreign travel with the countries visited and the dates, and 
antimicrobial therapy, as well as the more basic information. Failure to give this information may mean 
important pathogens are not isolated. 
 
Specimen transport: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Minimum volume of sample: A liquid specimen of 1-2 mL is sufficient. 2 gram (large pea-size) of solid 
specimen  
 
Special precautions: The specimen is unsatisfactory if any residual soap, detergent or disinfectant remains in 
the pan. Sample should avoid contamination with urine or the toilet bowl 
 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 1 day 
 
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 2-3 days 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
 
(Last updated November 2025) 
