 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
Fluids from normally sterile sites 
 
The detection of organisms in fluids that are normally sterile indicates significant infection, which can be life-
threatening. Specimens may be taken primarily for culture or this may be incidental to the prime reason for 
obtaining the specimen.  
Blood cultures may be positive with the same infecting organism, and occasionally may be positive when 
culture of the fluid fails to reveal the organism.  
Fluids will be sterile in the absence of infection, as will "sympathetic effusions", and those of immunological 
or traumatic origin and those due to metabolic disease or heart failure.  
Signs of infection may be difficult to detect clinically in patients whose joints are already inflamed due to 
rheumatological conditions. This is important because these patients are at increased risk of joint sepsis. 
 
General information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Use aseptic technique. 
Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and transport specimens in sealed plastic 
bags. 
 
Specimen type:  
Universal container: Amniotic fluid, bursa fluid, pericardial fluid, joint fluid, peritoneal/CAPD fluid (ascites), 
pleural fluid, dialysis fluid. 
Sterile fluids such as Ascitic Fluids, CAPD fluids, Joint Fluids can be sent in blood culture bottles - use 
standard set of  BC bottles (Aerobic  & Anaerobic bottle). For small volume samples - use Paediatric bottle.  
Pleural Fluids (Not Pleural Drains) should be sent in a set of blood culture bottles for culture plus an 
additional universal container for a Gram stain 
Capped Syringes: Vitreous aspirates & other intra ocular fluids should be injected into a Blood Culture bottle 
set with a small syringe of fluid submitted for a Gram stain. The needle MUST be removed before submission 
for the laboratory. 
Cell differentials are performed in Cytology, separate sample and request required 
    
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
 
 
Collection: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where possible. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible 
 
Minimum volume of sample: Ideally, a minimum volume of 1 mL. 
 
Large volume - specimens such as peritoneal fluid and ascitic fluid may contain very low numbers of 
organisms which are usually received in adequate quantities and require concentration to increase the 
likelihood of successful culture. 
 
Small volume - fluids such as synovial fluids may be received in inadequate volumes, which may impede the 
recovery of organisms. 
 
Enrichment culture is performed on all fluids from normally sterile sites to enhance the recovery of bacterial 
pathogens. 
 
Special precautions: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. 
Delays of over 48hr are undesirable. 
 
Bacteriology performs differentials, therefore one sterile pot is required and one set of blood culture 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: X10 6/L for cell count 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 30-60 mins for microscopy & Gram Stain, when 
telephoned as urgent. 
Turnaround time to final result (working days):  
2- 3 days for direct culture result 
5 days for enriched culture result 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Positive microscopy and/or Positive Culture results are telephoned to the requesting 
physician 
 
 
(Last updated November 2025) 
