 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
Genital Specimens for Culture 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): CE marked leak proof container 
 
Specimen type: High vaginal swab (HVS), vaginal discharge, vulval swab, labial swab, cervical swab, 
endocervical swab, penile swab, urethral swab, genital ulcer swab, semen, screening swabs for N. 
gonorrhoeae, aspirates from bartholin’s gland, fallopian tube, tubo-ovarian abscess, pouch of Douglas fluid, 
intra-uterine contraceptive device (IUCD), products of conception. 
 
Wire swabs are permitted for use with Utheral samples where required and they should be transported to 
the laboratory as soon as possible to prevent specimen degregation.  
 
High Vaginal swabs (HVS) are not suitable for the isolation of N. gonorrhoeae, Endocervical swabs should be 
submitted. 
 
Aspirates               
 
Genital/throat eSwab         
 Urethral Swab       
 
Charcoal swab for Trichomonas       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Collection: Use aseptic technique. Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and 
transport in sealed plastic bags. Collect swabs into appropriate transport medium and transport in sealed 
plastic bags. 
 
Genital tract swabs Cervical and high vaginal swabs should be taken with the aid of a speculum. It is 
important to avoid vulval contamination of the swab. For Trichomonas only, the posterior fornix, including 
any obvious candidal plaques should be swabbed using a charcoal swab. If pelvic infection, including 
gonorrhoea, is suspected, the cervix should be swabbed Separate samples should be collected into 
appropriate transport media for detection of viruses or C. trachomatis.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
High vaginal swabs After the introduction of the speculum, the eSwab should be rolled firmly over the 
surface of the vaginal vault. Please use an eSwab and ensure the liquid remains in the tube. 
 
Cervical swabs After introduction of the speculum to the vagina, the swab should be rotated inside the 
endocervix. Please use an eSwab and ensure the liquid remains in the tube. 
 
Urethral swabs Contamination with micro-organisms from the vulva or the foreskin should be avoided. Thin 
swabs are available for collection of specimens. The patient should not have passed urine for at least one 
hour. For males, if a discharge is not apparent, attempts should be made to "milk" exudate from the penis. 
The swab is gently passed through the urethral meatus and rotated. Place the thin swab in Amies transport 
medium with charcoal.  
 
Intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUCDs) The entire device should be sent.  
 
Rectal swabs Rectal swabs are taken via a proctoscope.  
 
Throat swabs Throat swabs should be taken from the tonsillar area and/or posterior pharynx avoiding the 
tongue and uvula.  
 
Fluids and pus These are taken from the fallopian tubes, tubo-ovarian and Bartholin’s abscesses, etc… during 
surgery 
 
Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when collecting sample. Samples with 
insufficient liquid will be discarded. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible.  
 
Minimum volume of sample: Fluids and pus – preferably a minimum volume of 1mL. 
 
Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when collecting sample. Samples with 
insufficient liquid will be discarded 
 
Special precautions: Endocervical swabs for gonorrhoea investigation should not be refrigerated 
 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 30-60 mins for microscopy  
1 day for culture 
 
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 2-3 days 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: HVS swabs for gonorrhoea investigation should not be 
refrigerated as this significantly reduces the recovery rate 
 
 
(Last updated September 2019) 
