 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase Antibodies 
 
General information 
 
Antibodies against the 65 isoform of the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65) are seen in around 
80% of patients with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) (Dade et al, 2020). However they are also associated 
with neurological disorders. The most common of these is Stiff Person Syndrome but they have also been 
implicated in some cases of temporal lobe epilepsy, cerebral ataxia and limbic encephalitis, as well as overlap 
syndromes (Dade et al, 2020).  
 
GAD antibodies can be ordered individually, or as part of an autoimmune diabetes panel containing IA-2 
antibodies, ZnT8 antibodies and GAD antibodies. 
 
Assay Interferences: Lipaemic or haemolysed samples should not be used. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Analyte: Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase (GAD) Antibodies 
 
Units: U/mL 
 
Specimen type: Serum (Brown top serum gel bottle) 
 
Frequency of analysis:  
 
For autoimmune diabetes: At initial diagnosis and in patients with suspected type 1 diabetes. Highest 
accuracy seen at initial presentation. 
 
For Stiff person syndrome: At initial diagnosis and at significant change of clinical symptoms 
 
Turnaround times: Median – 6 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature 
 
Additional/Special requirements: None 
 
Method: ELISA 
 
Participation in EQA scheme: UK NEQAS for Diabetic Markers 
 
Clinical information 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Interpretation: Autoimmune diabetes associated autoantibodies (ADAA) can be seen before clinical 
symptoms and used to stratify risk of progression to overt diabetes. In patients without a current diabetes 
diagnosis the likelihood of progression to diabetes within 5 years increases as additional antibody positivity 
increases. The 5-year risk of progression with only Islet cell antibody positivity is 2.2% but this increases up to 
70% when 3 additional antibodies (including ZnT8, IA-2 and GAD65) are also present (Polly, 2010). ADAA 
positivity can be lost as islet cell destruction progresses leading to misleading negative results. NG17 states 
the false negative rate can be reduced by carrying out quantitative tests for 2 different diabetes specific 
autoantibodies (with at least 1 being positive). Serum C-peptide should be used if there is still diagnostic 
uncertainty after the use of autoantibody testing. 
   
GAD65 antibody levels are commonly much higher in serum in neurological syndromes than in T1DM, and 
higher in CSF in cerebella ataxia and limbic encephalitis than in stiff person syndrome (Budhram et al, 2021) 
 
Reference Range: Negative is <5 U/mL 
 
 
Budhram, A., Sechi, E., Flanagan, E. P., Dubey, D., Zekeridou, A., Shah, S. S., Gadoth, A., Naddaf, E., McKeon, 
A., Pittock, S. J. & Zalewski, N. L. (2021). Clinical spectrum of high-titre GAD65 antibodies. Journal of 
neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry, 92(6), 645–654.  
 
Dade, M., Berzero, G., Izquierdo, C., Giry, M., Benazra, M., Delattre, J. Y., Psimaras, D., & Alentorn, A. (2020). 
Neurological Syndromes Associated with Anti-GAD Antibodies. International journal of molecular 
sciences, 21(10),  
 
Polly J. Bingley (2010) Clinical Applications of Diabetes Antibody Testing, The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology 
& Metabolism, 95, 25–33 
 
 
 
(Last updated July 2023) 
