 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
IA2 
 
 
General information 
 
The assessment of autoantibodies to pancreatic β cell antigens is an important serological marker of type 1 
diabetes mellitus (Type 1 DM). The antigens recognised by these antibodies include insulinoma associated 
antigen 2 (IA-2), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) GAD65kDa isoform, zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) and insulin. 
IA-2 antibodies can be ordered individually, or as part of a panel containing IA-2 antibodies, ZnT8 antibodies 
and GAD antibodies. 
 
Assay Interferences: Analysis by the manufacturer of sera from autoimmune disease controls indicated no 
interference from autoantibodies to TSH receptor antibody. 5% of sera positive for rheumatoid factor and 
5% of sera positive for autoantibodies to thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase were positive for IA2 using 
this method. These sample were also positive to GAD antibodies using the RSR GAD ELISA. 
Haemolysed, icteric and lipaemic samples should not be used. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Analyte: Insulinoma associated antigen 2 (IA-2) antibodies 
 
Units: U/mL 
 
Specimen type: Serum (Brown top serum gel bottle) 
 
Frequency of analysis: At initial diagnosis and in patients with suspected type 1 diabetes. Highest accuracy 
seen at initial presentation. 
 
Turnaround times: 10 days 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature 
 
Additional/special requirements: None 
 
Method: ELISA 
 
Participation in EQA scheme: UK NEQAS for Diabetic Markers 
 
Clinical information 
 
Interpretation: Autoimmune diabetes associated autoantibodies (ADAA) can be seen before clinical 
symptoms and used to stratify risk of progression to overt diabetes. In patients without a current diabetes 
diagnosis the likelihood of progression to diabetes within 5 years increases as additional antibody positivity 
increases. The 5-year risk of progression with only Islet cell antibody positivity is 2.2% but this increases up to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
70% when 3 additional antibodies (including ZnT8, IA-2 and GAD65) are also present (Polly, 2010). ADAA 
positivity can be lost as islet cell destruction progresses leading to misleading negative results. NG17 states 
the false negative rate can be reduced by carrying out quantitative tests for 2 different diabetes specific 
autoantibodies (with at least 1 being positive). Serum C-peptide should be used if there is still diagnostic 
uncertainty after the use of autoantibody testing.   
 
Reference Range: Negative is <7.5 U/mL 
 
Polly J. Bingley (2010) Clinical Applications of Diabetes Antibody Testing, The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology 
& Metabolism, 95, 25–33 
 
(Last updated July 2023) 
