 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
L-Selectin Shedding assay 
 
General information 
 
L-selectin shedding from the surface of leucocytes is a marker of activation. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) employ 
complex signalling pathways to generate an appropriate response to bacteria and viruses. A defect in these 
pathways can result in an impaired or absent immune response. This test is used to measure the amount of 
L-Selectin (CD62L) shed from the surface of neutrophils before and after stimulation of the TLR pathway. The 
test can help identify patients with defects in their toll-like receptor signalling pathway and can be used to 
diagnose IRAK-4, MyD88 and UNC93B deficiency. 
 
Assay Interferences: Blood anticoagulated with EDTA preservative is not acceptable as it is acts as a calcium 
chelator (most cellular functions require calcium) therefore sub optimal results may be generated. 
Quality of the sample received: Pre-activation of the samples can occur due to for example, infection or 
inadvertent activation caused by sample collection or transport to the lab with a concomitant reduction in 
CD62L expression. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Units: % of neutrophils positive for CD62L expression 
 
Specimen type: A minimum of 1ml blood in preservative-free heparin, with the sample <8hrs old. The 
department should be notified prior to venepuncture of the intention to request a L-Selectin shedding test 
(phone: 0161-276-6440 or extension 66440). In order to obtain a fresh uncompromised sample the whole 
blood for this assay must be received in a sterile universal container of preservative free heparin (10 
units/mL). An age matched quality control sample from a normal donor should be supplied along with the 
patient’s sample. 
 
Frequency of analysis: Repeat only indicated if the test has failed (particularly if the control sample has 
failed). 
 
Turnaround times (calendar days from sample receipt to authorised result): Mean - 2. 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature. Sample must be received <8hrs old and before 12 noon on 
weekdays only (not including bank holidays) to allow for processing and analysis. 
 
Method: Flow cytometry 
 
Participation in EQA Scheme: An EQA scheme is not available for this assay 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Clinical Information 
 
Reference range: A normal healthy patient sample should have >80% CD62L expression on the un-stimulated 
cells and shed <10% CD62L in response to all TLR agonists. The cell activator, Phorbol myristate acetate 
(PMA) is included as a positive control. 
 
Interpretation: Patients with IRAK-4 or MyD88 deficiency will still express CD62L after treatment with 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS, TLR4 agonist) and the compound CL097 (TLR7/8 agonist) but have lost CD62L 
expression as a result of treatment with PMA. UNC-93B deficient patients will still express CD62L with CL097 
but have lost CD62L with both LPS and PMA. 
 
 
(Last updated February 2024) 
