 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Meningococcal Reference Unit 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Meningococcal DNA detection by PCR (including Pneumococcal 
PCR) 
 
The Meningococcal Reference Unit provides a separate manual that is distributed to all users of the unit, and 
is also available on https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/meningococcal-reference-unit-mru-user-
manual  
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives):  
EDTA Blood tube 
CE marked leak proof container 
 
Specimen type: EDTA blood, CSF, pleural fluid, DNA extracts 
Where a CSF sample is available, this should be sent in addition to an EDTA blood sample 
 
Collection: CE marked leak proof container 
Specimen transport: Ambient or refrigerated 
Specimen type and transport: 
 
EDTA blood sample collected on admission should be sent to the Meningococcal Reference Unit 
(MRU) if PCR confirmation is required. Heparinised, clotted blood, serum or citrated samples can be 
tested, but EDTA is preferred. 
 
Whole CSF (i.e. an uncentrifuged specimen) should be sent in small sterile containers such as a 
sterile 2mL screw capped vial (rather than universal containers). 
 
Minimum volume of sample: Minimum volume of 500µL  
 
Special precautions: Remember to also collect blood cultures and a throat swab for bacteriology and label 
these clearly for meningococcal investigation. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Threshold Cycle (CT) 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 1-2 days 
 
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 2 days 
Turnaround time: 
Negative results and Meningococcal Serogroup B positive results, are typically available within 24 hours of 
receipt. Samples requiring serogroup confirmation and samples confirmed positive for Pneumococcal are 
available within 48 hours. Urgent samples may be processed sooner providing the laboratory is notified in 
advance of receipt 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Meningococcal Reference Unit 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Same day (if received by 10.00am) 
 
Results on specimens received up to 10.00am on Monday – Friday are normally available between 4.30pm 
and 5.00pm on the same day. 
 
Positive results will be telephoned following serogroup confirmation up to 5.30pm, or as soon as possible on 
the morning of the next working day, when printed reports will also be sent out.   
 
Urgent turnaround times 
Arrangements to accept couriered urgent samples for PCR or other investigations must be agreed with the 
MRU before the samples are sent.  Failure to do so may result in the specimen(s) not being tested in a timely 
fashion 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Any specimens for PCR tests should be stored at 4OC and 
not frozen prior to transport. 
 
The likelihood of a positive result decreases as the interval of sampling after starting antibiotics lengthens.  
Samples for PCR taken more than 48 hours after commencement of antibiotic therapy are unlikely to give 
useful results. CSF may remain “positive” for longer periods. 
 
 
(Last updated February 2019) 
