 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Mouth swab 
 
General information           
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof 
containers and transport specimens in sealed plastic bags. 
 
Collect with liquid eSwab and transport in sealed plastic bags. 
 
Specimen type: Mouth Swab 
 
 
     
Collection: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where possible. To assure that the preconditions 
of the sampling for oral infections are comparable it is advised that patients should not:   
1. Eat or drink within 2 hours   
2. Brush their teeth within 2 hours   
3. Use any mouth rinse of disinfectant within 2 hours prior to sampling   
If possible samples should be taken in the morning under fasting conditions.   
Unless otherwise indicated collect each swab for bacterial and/or fungal culture and place in appropriate 
transport medium.   
Collect specimens other than swabs into appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and place in sealed 
plastic bags 
Sample pus if present otherwise sample any lesions or inflamed areas.   
A tongue depressor or spatula may be helpful to aid vision and avoid contamination from other parts of the 
mouth. 
 
Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when collecting sample. Samples with 
insufficient liquid will be discarded. 
 
Specimen transport (e.g at room temperature, or within 4 hrs): Use aseptic technique. Unless otherwise 
stated, swabs for bacterial and fungal culture should taken with a liquid eSwab. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 1ml. Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when 
collecting sample. Samples with insufficient liquid will be discarded   
 
Special precautions: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature.   
 
Delays of over 48hr are undesirable. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 1 day  
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 2‐3 days 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results:  Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where 
possible. 
 
Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible. 
 
 
(Last updated September 2019) 
