 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
MRSA 
Most MRSA infections are healthcare-associated, but an increasing number of infections are community-
acquired, with patients having no established risk factors for acquisition of MRSA. While infections with 
community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA) are usually mild they can be severe. 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Collection using Liquid eSwabs under the direction of your 
local IPC Team. 
 
Specimen type: Swab from Nose, Groin and manipulated wound sites. 
Perineal swabs will be accepted if agreed with your local IPC Team. 
Urine, Sputum and manipulated sites will be accepted if they are within local guidance and agreed with the 
IPC Team. 
Double MRSA eSwab (nose & groin/perineum only)  
 
Single eSwab (wound sites) 
  
NOTE: Urine sample requested for MRSA screen must be sent in urine boric acid container (below): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collection: Use aseptic technique 
Double MRSA eSwab (N+G, or Peri): 
Dampen swab with one drop of sterile saline. Do not use the liquid from the eSwab as the whole amount is 
needed for the test. 
Do not use excessive force, pressure or bending when collecting the swab or it could break. 
Apply label vertically. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
 
 
 
Single MRSA eSWAB (all other sites):  
Dampen swab with one drop of sterile saline. Do not use the liquid from the eSwab as the whole amount is 
needed for the test. 
Do not use excessive force, pressure or bending when collecting the swab or it could break 
 
Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when collecting sample. Samples with 
insufficient liquid will be discarded. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 1ml. Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when 
collecting sample. Samples with insufficient liquid will be discarded 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
Special precautions: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. 
Delays of over 48hr are undesirable. 
The white swabs should be used for nose swab as nose is the highest area of MRSA colonisation. The white 
swab swab should remain in the sample tube and is transferred to the laboratory. 
 
Pink swab should NEVER transferred to the lab.  
 
 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time: Negative screen at 1 working day 
Positive MRSA result with sensitivities at 2 working days 
 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where 
possible. 
 
 
 
(Last updated November 2025) 
