 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
Mycobacteria – Culture, Sensitivity and PCR 
 
General information 
 
 
 
 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Use aseptic technique.  
Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and transport in sealed plastic bags. 
 
              
 
 
    
Specimen type: Sputum, gastric washing, sterile site body fluids (CSF, pleural fluids etc), urine, skin or tissue 
biopsies, bone marrow, bronchoalveolar washings, blood, post-mortem specimens, bone 
 
Collection: If sample volume is insufficient for both, culture is usually preferred to microscopy due to greater 
sensitivity. 
 
BD Bactec Myco/F Lytic Culture Bottle (1-5ml) 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible.  Specimens should 
be transported and received in the laboratory within one working day of collection and processed as soon as 
possible. Requirements of individual testing laboratories should be referred to.  
If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature (this does not include 
blood culture bottles must not be refrigerated) 
 
 
Blood and Bone Marrow 
Request the TB blood culture bottles (as shown above) from the laboratory on  0161 276 4424, and request a 
porter to collect. These bottles MUST NOT be sent via the pod system. 
 
Sputum specimens 
Sputum specimens should be relatively fresh (less than 1 day old) to minimise contamination. Purulent 
specimens are best. Three samples of ≥5mL should be collected approximately 8-24 hours apart with at least 
one from early morning. 
 
Samples taken early morning (ie shortly after patient waking) have the greatest yield. When the cough is dry, 
physiotherapy, postural drainage or inhalation of nebulised saline (‘sputum induction’) before expectoration 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
may be helpful. 
 
Bronchoalveolar lavage/bronchial washings  
These may be sent if spontaneous or induced sputum is unavailable or if such specimens are AFB smear 
negative. Note: Contamination of the bronchoscope with tap water, which may contain environmental 
Mycobacterium species, should be avoided. Minimum sample size is preferably 5mL. 
 
Urine specimens  
Whole urine specimens should be collected in the early morning on three consecutive days in a CE marked 
leak proof container (that does not contain boric acid), and placed in a sealed plastic bag.  
 
Sterile site body fluids  
Sterile site body fluids (CSF, pleural fluid, etc) will normally not require decontamination, and can be 
inoculated directly to neutral media. However, sterile site body fluids can be treated with acid if necessary. 
Collect aseptically as much (eg>6mL in adults) CSF sample as possible into a CE Marked leak proof container 
in a sealed plastic bag. If only a small volume is available after initial lumbar puncture, and the findings of cell 
counts and protein suggest TB meningitis, a second procedure should be considered to obtain a larger 
volume to improve chances of achieving positive cultures.  
 
It should be noted that pleural or pericardial fluids are not very sensitive samples for the detection of M. 
tuberculosis, and that a concurrent pleural or pericardial biopsy taken with the fluid is more useful. A 
negative result on these fluids does not rule out the diagnosis. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 1mL of Sputum 
5mL of BAL 
6mL of CSF 
1-5mL of bone marrow or blood for the BD Bactec Myco/F Lytic Culture Bottle 
 
Special precautions: For the initial diagnosis of mycobacterial infection all specimens should be fresh and 
taken, whenever possible, before anti-tubercular treatment is started. ‘Other’ antimicrobials may also have 
significant anti-mycobacterial activity, notably the fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin or 
moxifloxacin, and the macrolides such as clarithromycin or azithromycin. 
 
Any samples taken where the patient is suspected of having TB MUST be divided within theatre so as to 
provide sufficient samples for Histology (sent in formalin) and Microbiology (Sent in an empty sterile 
container). 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time: 
Urgent microscopy available within 2 hours 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
Culture 3 weeks (incubation continued for 6 weeks) 
Mycobacterium PCR available within 3 working days 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: EDTA, even in trace amounts, inhibits the growth of some 
Mycobacterium species.  
 
 
(Last updated December 2020) 
