 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Nose Swab 
 
Nasal colonisation with Staphylococcus aureus increases the risk of staphylococcal infections at other sites of 
the body such as postoperative wounds and dialysis access sites. Single organism nasal screens for 
Staphylococcus aureus may be requested as part of a PVL outbreak as part of a IPC investigation. For 
Bordetella pertussis investigation please see Pernasal Swab: https://mft.nhs.uk/the-trust/other-
departments/laboratory-medicine/manchester-medical-microbiology-partnership/repertoire-of-
tests/#pernasal 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof 
containers and transport specimens in sealed plastic bags. 
 
Collect using liquid eSwabs and transport in sealed plastic bags. 
 
Specimen type: Nose Swab 
  
Collection: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where possible. Plain sterile cotton wool swab. 
Sample the anterior nares by gently rotating the swab over the mucosal surface. 
 
Unless otherwise stated, swabs for bacterial and fungal culture should be taken with a liquid eSwab 
 
Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when collecting sample. Samples with 
insufficient liquid will be discarded. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible. If processing is 
delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. Delays of over 48hr are undesirable. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 1ml. Liquid eSwabs contain 1ml of liquid. No liquid should be discarded when 
collecting sample. Samples with insufficient liquid will be discarded  
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable  
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 2 days  
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 2-3 days 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Special considerations to minimise deterioration 
If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. Delays of over 48hr 
are undesirable. 
 
Limitations:  
Nasal swabs should not be taken to investigate the presence of Bordetella pertussis. 
 
 
(Last updated August 2019) 
