 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Peritoneal Fluids 
 
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) is used as an alternative to haemodialysis for the 
management of patients with end-stage renal failure.   
 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Withdraw fluid aseptically from the injection port of the 
plastic dialysate bag with a sterile needle and syringe and transfer to a CE marked leak proof containers and 
place in sealed plastic bag. 
 
Specimen type: In a sealed plastic bag with a request form.  
 
Cell count = Sterile leakproof container in a sealed plastic bag containing 20mL of fluid for microscopy.  
Culture = Inoculated BD BACTEC Plus Aerobic/Anaerobic (blue/purple) BC bottles. 
 
Collection: Use aseptic technique. 
 
Collect specimens in appropriate CE marked leak proof containers and transport specimens in sealed plastic 
bags. 
 
Large volumes or whole dialysate bags may require special transportation according to local protocols. They 
should be transported in rigid, leakproof outer containers. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible 
 
Minimum volume of sample: Minimum volume of10mL.  
 
If blood culture bottles are used they should be inoculated aseptically with 5-10 mL of dialysate 
 
Special precautions: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where possible. 
 
Bacteriology performs differentials, therefore one sterile pot is required and one set of blood culture 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Cell count x 106 per litre    
 
Turnaround time: 
2 – 7 working days for culture 
30 – 60 mins for cell count. Telephone the laboratory in advance for urgent microscopy 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
 
Clinical information 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to 
storage at ambient temperature. Delays of over 48hr are undesirable. 
 
(Last updated November 2024) 
