 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/1 
 
Laboratory Medicine Care Division 
 
Immunology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/1 
Platelet Glycoprotein Expression 
 
General information 
Platelet glycoprotein expression is useful in the diagnosis of Glanzmann's thrombasthenia and 
BernardSoulier syndrome. These hereditary platelet disorders are characterised by selective deficiencies of 
platelet membrane glycoproteins. 
 
Specimen transport: At room temperature 
 
Repeat frequency: At significant change of clinical symptoms 
 
Special precautions: The assay should be carried out on blood that is < 24 hours old. Samples can be stored 
at 4°C prior to analysis. Blood should be taken in to sodium citrate anticoagulant. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Normal range: >90% positive platelets 
 
Volume and sample type: 5ml citrate blood 
 
Method: Flow cytometric analysis of CD41, CD42b & CD61 
 
Turnaround time (calendar days from sample receipt to authorised result): Median – 2 
 
Participation in EQA Scheme: No formal scheme available. We perform a clinical review of abnormal results 
against other laboratory data and clinical information to assure results fit with the clinical diagnosis. 
 
Clinical information 
 
Indications for the test: Prolonged bleeding in infancy, haemorrhage, family history 
 
Factors affecting the test: This assay is not recommended for patients with thrombocytopenia (<100 x 109/L) 
 
Interpretation: In Bernard-Soulier syndrome GPIb/IX/V (CD42b) is absent or dysfunctional. In Glanzmann 
thrombasthenia GPIIb/IIIa (CD41/CD61) is absent or dysfunctional. A mild decrease in the expression suggest 
a variant or heterozygous state. 
 
The CD61 clone (SZ21) bears the platelet alloantigen PlA1 (HPA-1a). Used in flow cytometry, it shows a 
markedly reduced reactivity with platelets bearing the PlA2 (HPA-1b) allele. As described in the IFU, studies 
indicate that 70% of individuals are PlA1/PlA1, 27% PlA1/PlA2, and 3% PlA2/PlA2. Therefore, reduced CD61 
binding may be observed in a percentage of healthy individuals. 
 
(Last updated June 2026) 
