 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Rapid/Routine Carbapenemase-Producing Enterobacteriaceae 
(CPE) Screen 
 
In response to the increasing numbers of CPE producing clinical isolates of Enterobacteriaceae the Infection 
Control Consultant and Microbiology department have produced a protocol for CPE screening and detection. 
The isolation of a clinical CPE isolate prompts the Infection Prevention & Control Team to screen all possible 
patient contacts to reduce the transmission of resistance enzymes within the Trust. 
 
Rapid & routine CPE screens are processed on a molecular platform; culture is only performed on positive 
samples for epidemiological & monitoring purposes. 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): 
  
Swab: Double headed Red topped swab; available from Microbiology. Please note Charcoal swabs are 
unsuitable for this test at the Oxford Road campus and will not be processed. 
 
 
 
Specimen type: Screening of faeces/rectal swabs  
 
Samples are stored in Microbiology for 7 days should any additional tests be requested. 
 
Specimen transport: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. 
Delays of over 48hr are undesirable.   
 
Type and minimum volume of sample: Not applicable 
 
Special precautions: None 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Threshold Cycle (CT) 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time:  
Rapid CPE Screens: Designated wards agreed with IPC  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Trafford Transfers: 2-4 hours from receipt into Microbiology Reception. The laboratory MUST be telephoned 
prior to the patient(s) being sampled. 
 
Samples should be received in the laboratory before 6pm (Mon-Fri) and before 4pm (Weekends/Bank 
Holidays) 
 
Routine CPE Screen: Designated wards agreed with IPC 24-72hrs 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Faecal material must be visible on the cotton tip of the 
swab; failure to provide faecal material may produce a false negative screening result. 
 
Some faecal products may prove inhibitory to the PCR process; samples will be reported as inhibitory and a 
repeat will be requested. 
  
(Last updated August 2019) 
