 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Respiratory samples for culture 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives):  
 
 
 
 
Specimen type: Bronchial aspirate, transthoracic aspirate, bronchoalveolar lavage, transtracheal aspirate, 
bronchial brushings, protected catheter specimens, bronchial washings, endotracheal tube specimens, 
sputum – expectorated 
 
Collection: All specimens should be fresh and taken before antimicrobial treatment is started. 
Sputum samples for routine culture that are not 'purulent' or 'mucopurulent' will not be tested by the 
microbiology laboratory. 
 
Specimen transport: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. 
Delays of over 48hr are undesirable. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 1 mL 
 
Special precautions: Do not submit samples with push top lids or with Trap tubing still attached. These 
samples are prone to leaking which poses a safety risk to individuals involved in transportation and receipt of 
sample as well as risking contamination of the sample. Please ensure samples are sent in standard universal 
tubes with screw top lids (as per photos above). Samples that fail to comply may be rejected. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 2 days 
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 2-3 days 
Sputum investigation requiring fungal investigation is up to 7 days 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: All samples are suitable for overnight refrigeration only, 
they must not be stored over a weekend. Sputum may be refrigerated for up to 2-3 h without an appreciable 
loss of pathogens. Any delay beyond this time may allow overgrowth of Gram-negative bacilli, and 
Haemophilus species and S. pneumoniae may be rendered non-viable 
 
 
(Last updated November 2024) 
