 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Molecular Microbiology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Respiratory virus PCR 
 
Respiratory screen including 
1) Influenza A including H1N1 (avian types: contact lab)  
2) Influenza B 
3) Parainfluenza viruses 1,2,3 
4) Respiratory syncytial virus  
5) Metapneumovirus 
6) Adenovirus  
7) Rhinovirus  
 
General information 
 
Specimen type and container:  
 
Nose and/or throat swab (virus transport medium) 
 
BAL/Sputum (sterile container) 
 
NPA (Sterile container) 
 
Specimen transport: Ambient or refrigerated 
 
Minimum volume of sample: Minimum volume 500µl 
 
Special precautions: For avian flu please contact the laboratory with full travel history 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Threshold cycle (CT) 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 2 days  
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 3 days 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: All samples are suitable for overnight refrigeration only, 
they must not be stored over a weekend 
 
False negative results may occur for a variety of reasons, for example inappropriate timing of sample 
collection, inappropriate sample, presence of virus below the detectable limit of the assay. New and 
emerging variants may also occur which may not be detected by this assay. Towards the limit of detection of 
an assay sampling variation will result in lower reproducibility. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Molecular Microbiology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
 
 
In order to provide the most clinically beneficial, operationally efficient and cost effective service the 
laboratory employs a number of multiplex assays and testing algorithms, which are based on UK Standards 
for Microbiology Investigations; it is normal practice to use these even when not all tests within the 
multiplex or algorithm are requested. 
 
It is our policy to report all results along with the requested result to provide as much information as 
possible to aid diagnosis 
 
 
 
During an outbreak of Influenza the laboratory offers a more rapid test (4 hours).  The test detects influenza 
A, B and RSV. 
 
Specimen type: Only nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs and nasopharyngeal aspirates (NPA) collected from patients 
with signs and symptoms of respiratory infection  
 
Specimen container: Nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs should be collected into a laboratory approved virus 
transport medium.  Nasopharyngeal aspirates should be collected into a laboratory approved container. 
 
Any interference with the extraction and amplification of influenza A, B and RSV in any given patient sample 
will be identified by a negative result for the internal control. These will then be re-tested and reported as 
‘Sample inhibitory for respiratory PCR’.  
 
(Last updated February 2019) 
