 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Tissue and Biopsies 
 
A biopsy may be defined as a portion of tissue removed from the living body for further examination. Ideally 
these specimens should be discussed with the laboratory prior to sampling to ensure that transport and 
processing are timely and appropriate tests are performed 
 
Routine Fungal Culture Only is performed by the Microbiology Department. For any samples requiring 
Complex or Extended Fungal Investigation, please send a separate sample to the Mycology Reference Centre 
Mycology (MRCM). 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Tissue or biopsy material in a microbiologically CE marked 
leak proof container without formalin. 
 
 
  
Specimen type:  
 
Tissue, Biopsy 
 
Ulcer Biopsy 
 
Collection: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where possible. 
 
Specimen transport: Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible 
 
NOTE: heart valve tissues can be requested as urgent samples to avoid delay in processing and to ensure an 
adequate sample tracking. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: Large enough to carry out all microscopy preparations and cultures. 
 
Special precautions: If specimen is small, place it in sterile water to prevent desiccation. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days):  
Gram stain 30mins – 2hours within receipt into the Microbiology laboratory, on request.  
Culture 1 day 
 
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 5-7 days 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Specimens received in formol-saline are not suitable for 
culture. If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. Delays of 
over 48 hr are undesirable. 
 
(Last updated November 2025) 
