 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
Urines 
 
Urinary tract infection (UTI) results from the presence and multiplication of microorganisms in one or more 
structures of the urinary tract with associated tissue invasion. This can give rise to a wide variety of clinical 
syndromes. These include acute and chronic pyelonephritis (kidney and renal pelvis), cystitis (bladder), 
urethritis (urethra), epididymitis (epididymis) and prostatitis (prostate gland). Infection may spread to 
surrounding tissues (eg perinephric abscess) or to the bloodstream. 
 
The microscopical presence of White Blood Cells (WBC) is quantified and correlated to bacterial growth to 
diagnose a urinary tract infection. The presence of Red Blood Cells (RBC) and epithelial cells is also reported. 
 
 
General information 
 
Collection container (including preservatives): Collect specimens in 10 ml Monovette containing 
Boric Acid and transport specimens in sealed plastic bags. 
      
  
 
 
  
 
 
Specimens not received in 10 ml Monovette containing Boric Acid will be rejected. 
Exceptions will be made for paediatric urine samples on babies up to 3 months, where the volume is less than 
10ml. A universal container will be accepted for these patients. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
Specimen type: Urine: Clean catch urine (CCU) Mid stream urine (MSU) Supra pubic aspirate (SPA) Bladder 
urine & Catheter urine 
 
Collection: 
 
 
 
 
 
Before sending to the laboratory urines should be screened in the clinical setting using dipsticks that are able 
to detect both leucocyte esterase and nitrites. This will give an almost immediate indication as to whether 
UTI is likely and for the need to culture in all but a few patient groups. There is a strict rejection policy in 
place for urine samples that are submitted without the relevant information or screening. Urine catheter tips 
will not be processed. There is no such thing as a routine MSU or CSU. Specimens should be sent only on 
clinical grounds.  MSU and clean catch urines are the most commonly collected specimens and are 
recommended for routine use.  
 
Suprapubic aspirate (SPA) is seen as the "gold standard" but is usually reserved for clarification of equivocal 
results from voided urine in infants and small children. Before SPA is attempted it is preferable to use 
ultrasound guidance to determine the presence of urine in the bladder. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
Specimen transport: Delays and storage at room temperature allow organisms to multiply which generates 
results that do not reflect the true clinical situation. Where delays in processing are unavoidable, 
refrigeration at 4°C is essential. 
 
Samples >48 hours old are not suitable for testing and a repeat sample should be collected. 
 
Minimum volume of sample: A minimum volume of 1mL  
 
For Mycobacteria culture collect 3 consecutive early morning urine samples in 200mL containers  
 
Special precautions: Specimens should be transported and processed within 4 hr 
 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: X106/L (WBC/RBC) 
Urine culture is quantified (cfu) 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time: 30 – 60 mins for cell count if laboratory contacted prior to sending 
1-3 working days for culture 
 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where 
possible. 
 
(Last updated November 2024) 
