 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/3 
 
Laboratory Medicine Care Division 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/3 
Voriconazole 
 
Anti-fungal drug level monitoring 
 
 
General information 
Turnaround time: 1-2 days 
Sample type/container:  
 
Typical volume: Adult 4.9ml, Neonate 0.5ml 
• 
Minimum blood volume is 2 ml; serum volume of 1 ml is required for testing. 
• 
Serum tube (Sarstedt S-Monovette white cap). Blood collected in EDTA tubes will be rejected. 
Gel separation tubes should NOT be used as the gel may reduce the drug level detected. More accurate 
results will be obtained by using blood tubes with no additives. 
Specimens should be transported to the laboratory as soon as possible. If a delay is anticipated, samples 
should be refrigerated. Assays are validated for transportation of samples at room temperature for up to and 
including 5 days.  
For all drugs, the time of previous dose and the time of sampling should be recorded accurately to allow 
correct interpretation.  
Transportation 
• 
Samples should be placed into a plastic Ziploc bag, sealed, and then placed into another sealed plastic 
Ziploc bag (preferably with a biohazard label on the outside), as shown below.  
 
 
 
• 
Category B transport boxes or an appropriate transport bag (i.e., one which adheres to regulations 
governing the transportation of diagnostic specimens) must be used for transport by road or between 
Manchester University Foundation Trust sites (but are not necessary within Wythenshawe hospital 
grounds). 
X 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/3 
 
Laboratory Medicine Care Division 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/3 
 
• 
Please see below for packaging requirements.
 
For more information - https://mrcm.org.uk/sample-collection/ 
 
Laboratory Information 
 
Biological interval/clinical decision values 
 
• Pre-dose level target range 1.3-5.7 mg/L  
 
• Dose escalation is advised for any level less than 1.3 mg/L  
 
• Due to the non-linear pharmacokinetics of the drug in adults, informed clinical judgement regarding target 
range is only possible for pre-dose samples 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3/3 
 
Laboratory Medicine Care Division 
 
Mycology 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
3/3 
Clinical Information 
 
Therapeutic drug monitoring is essential for monitoring patent safety and treatment efficacy. 
 
Pre-dose: 
Oral: 10-14 h post-dose window* (i.e. pre-dose as BD dosing)  
IV: Just before dose* 
Post dose: 
Not required  
Commence: 
after 3 days of therapy 
Frequency: 
Dependent on patient - seek advice. If patient has suspected invasive disease or very 
unwell, obtain a level at day 5 of treatment and repeat at least weekly until therapeutic 
levels are obtained. If IV to oral switch is done, repeat level about 5 days after the 
switch. Once therapeutic levels are achieved, repeat the levels at 2, 4, 8 and 12 weeks, 
and every three months thereafter.  
 
For other diagnoses, obtain a level at week 2, 4, 8 and 12 of treatment and every three 
months thereafter.  
 
Repeat levels two weeks after any dose change, IV to oral switch or if there is a risk for 
a drug-drug interaction. Repeat levels if there is a concern about poor compliance/poor 
absorption. 
Lab assay runs: 
Each weekday 
 
* These samples are most useful for clinical management  
 
(Last updated May 2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
