 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
1/2 
Wounds: Skin, Superficial, Non-surgical 
 
Infections of the skin and subcutaneous tissues are caused by a wide range of organisms. Organisms isolated 
from a clinically infected wound may be clinically significant but this decision needs to be made in 
conjunction with clinical details. Examination of biopsies might be more effective for diagnosis than swabs 
(See Tissue & Biopsy Section) 
 
General information 
 
Specimen container: Unless otherwise stated, swabs for bacterial and fungal culture should then be taken 
using a liquid eSwab. Samples of pus/exudate, if present, are preferred to swabs 
 
Specimen type:  
 
 
    
 
Collection: Sample a representative part of the lesion. Swabbing dry crusted areas is unlikely to yield the 
causative pathogen.  If specimens are taken from ulcers, the debris on the ulcer should be removed and the 
ulcer should be cleaned with saline.  
 
Specimen transport: If processing is delayed, refrigeration is preferable to storage at ambient temperature. 
Delays of over 48hr are undesirable 
 
Minimum volume of sample: 1ml. The liquid in the eSwab should NOT be discarded. The laboratory cannot 
process samples with <1ml of liquid remaining in the swab and these samples will be discarded. 
 
Special precautions: If only a minute amount of pus or exudate is available it is preferable to send a 
pus/exudate swab in transport medium to minimise the risk of desiccation during transport. 
 
Laboratory information 
 
Measurement units: Not applicable 
 
Biological reference units: Not applicable 
 
Turnaround time for provisional result (working days): 1 day 
Turnaround time to final result (working days): 2-3 days 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2/2 
 
Division of Laboratory Medicine 
 
Bacteriology 
 
mft.nhs.uk/laboratorymedicine 
2/2 
 
Clinical information 
 
Clinical decision points: Not applicable 
 
Factors known to significantly affect the results: Collect specimens before antimicrobial therapy where 
possible. 
 
Specimens should be transported and processed as soon as possible to prevent deterioration. 
 
(Last updated August 2019) 
